Major funding for Odyssey
was provided by the National
Endowment for the Humanities.
Additional funding was provided by
the Corporation for Public Broadcasting,
and the Polaroid Corporation.
(triumphant music)
(bell music)
(chanting in foreign language)
This is a Balinese performance,
portraying the invisible
forces of nature at work.
These are the shadows of those forces,
shadows of gods and demons.
Gods who embody growth
inhabit the other world,
the demonic forces of decay
dwell in the world below.
In the middle world, where we humans live,
an equilibrium must be maintained,
or all three worlds will come to an end.
But guarding such a catastrophe,
the Balinese must constantly keep
growth and decay in balance.
The medium through which
they attempt to do this
and the pomp which they
bottle their entire society,
is their art.
My name is Steve Lansing,
I'm an anthropologist, and for
most of my professional life
I've been studying civilization
on the island of Bali in Indonesia.
What interested me about
Bali was the fact that it's
probably the best example of a society
in which the arts play a major role
in the lives of almost all the people.
In thousands of temples around the island,
poetry, theater, music, and the other arts
are performed by ordinary people
as offerings for the gods and demons.
(speaking in foreign language)
Artistic performances
make the temples work,
and the temples make society work.
Usually social
scientists view societies
as created by economic forces,
but Bali is different.
Civilization began here
with Sandskrit poetry
about a wondrous, mythical Indian world.
Today, those same poems are chanted
by Ida Dadboos Siyasa,
who is learning to become a high priest
by studying the ancient manuscripts
of Hindu Buddhist philosophy,
which is chiefly preserved in Bali
by copying them onto the
leaves of the lontar palm.
2000 years ago, Bali was a tribal society,
who liked chiefs.
Then wandering priests brought books
of Hindu Buddhist poetry from India,
like this epic, the Banyan.
(chanting in foreign language)
The Balinese use the classical Indian rule
described in these poems as models
creating a new civilization.
They continually modify their own society
until myths of the poetry became real.
Today priests not the only people
who read the lontar books.
Through poetry clubs like this one,
the ancient literature reaches
into the lives of nearly everyone.
Since the poems are in a
language no longer spoken,
every line is spontaneously translated
and its meaning discussed.
Anyone can learn to read the lontars,
but a high priest must
live their philosophy.
(easy pipe music)
To become a high priest, Ida Daboos
must symbolically perform his own funeral,
and cut all ties to the ego.
Only then can he serve society.
1000 years ago,
the holy men and women who
lived in this monastery,
carved like a cave into the hillside,
followed the same path.
Living apart from society,
they studied the lontars,
became advisors to Bali's kings.
Together, priests and kings ruled Bali
until the 20th century.
The center of the middle world was here,
at the great palace of Klungkung.
Today a Hall of Justice
is all that remains.
The Kakord Mayan is the grandson
of the last king of Klungkung.
In the days of his grandfather,
Bali was peaceful and prosperous.
Rice exports worth half a
million Dutch guilders a year.
By 1906, Bali had become a temptation
the Dutch Colonial Empire
could no longer resist.
The Kakord's father was
then a young prince.
On September 14, 1906 three battalions
of infantry, calvary, and artillery
under the command of General Van Tonningen
landed on the beaches of South Bali,
and advanced towards the palace at Badung.
Bali was to become a part of
the Dutch Colonial Empire.
As the army marched inland,
they found the villages
deserted and in flames.
Small groups of Balinese
armed with swords attacked
and were quickly killed.
(artillery exploding)
Several days later, Dutch
arrived at the gates
of the palace at Badung.
Two batteries of cannons
fired upon Bali's warriors,
and the royal family,
who were armed only
with swords and lances.
Within an hour,
Dutch soldiers were
looting the smoking ruins.
Every Balinese in the palace was dead.
For two years the Balinese fought back.
Princes and their courts chose death,
rather than surrender.
Finally the Dutch attacked Klungkung,
the last and greatest royal court.
Though defeat was certain,
Klungkung would not surrender.
The king and his entire court,
dressed in their most elegant garments,
purposefully marched into the gunfire.
Those who were not shot,
stabbed themselves on the spot.
Women disdainfully hurled
jewels at their assassins,
cheating their enemy of
any sense of victory.
The Balinese called this the puputan,
the finish.
Yet the destruction of the great courts
was not the end of Balinese civilization.
It's real foundation lay in the temples.
Thousands of temples survived the battles,
here the floral offerings
have never ceased.
The Dutch ruled Bali until World War II
when the Japanese navy drove them out.
The Balinese fought for independence,
and in 1947 became a province
of the new nation of Indonesia.
(airplane engine roaring)
In 1969 a more subtle invasion began
with building an international airport.
A few thousand tourists
arrived the first year.
By 1979, they were coming at the rate
of 1/3 of a million per year.
There are only two million Balinese.
With the tourists came the technology,
and the ideas of the West.
(speaking foreign language)
Igusti Kallair, Balinese priest.
(chanting)
The coexistence of the ancient and modern
may be less trouble to the Balinese
because their idea of time
is very different than ours.
We think of time as
moving in a straight line,
from past to future.
The Balinese see time as
many repeating cycles.
These cycles represent
the rhythms of growth
in the natural world.
For instance, a flower
is on a short time cycle.
A log is on a much longer cycle.
While human beings are
somewhere in between.
Time cycles are repeated endlessly,
so the past is never really gone.
Balinese calendars don't
measure the passage of years,
but mark the way of different
time cycles intersect.
This is one of the simplest
Balinese calendars,
containing only two cycles as well as
the gods and demons that affect them.
Each day has a special quality,
depending on where it falls.
The only example we have on our calendar
representing cycles is when
Friday falls on the 13th day of the month.
Along the top are the gods.
At the bottom, demons.
Reading down, the days
of the five day cycle.
Reading across, a seven day cycle.
This is the day of Dupat,
the free floating head.
The goddess Dura has power over this day.
As well as the buffalo-headed demon.
This is 35 day calendar,
there are hundreds of others.
Some calendars keep track
of cycles of 10,000 years.
(exuberant music playing)
The temples, like calendars,
help to keep track of cycles.
Most of the time each temple is empty
until the day when it begins a new cycle
by holding festival.
It is these festivals that control
the flow of life in the village.
Balinese believe that every 420 days,
the gods of the village,
who are actually ancestors
who have gone up to Heaven,
return to the village for
a period of three days
in order to be worshiped by the people.
The gods come down and
fly into these shrines,
one by one.
The living villagers
then come to the temple
only on that day, in order
to worship their ancestors.
This incense is the stairway to the sky
upon which the gods descend.
The holy water, this is ordinarily water
taken from a sacred spring.
For an instant, the priest becomes Siva.
Actually becomes the god and
turns this ordinary water
into the waters of life.
The gods come to be worshiped,
through music, poetry, and
then offerings like these,
glapor offerings.
The arts of Bali.
But the demons come, hoping to be satiated
with blood sacrifices.
This is the gate to the
inner sanctum of the temple,
protected by a spirit or a demon wall.
The gods and then worshipers
pass freely through that door.
But demons only travel in straight lines,
so if a demon tries to come through here,
he bangs his head against
that wall and is frustrated.
But the gods and worshipers
pass freely around the side
and then in the inner sanctum.
Most villages
have dozens of temples,
so preparations for temple festivals
seem to be going on all the time
in some corner of the village.
For three days, each temple
becomes an outdoor theater.
It's in these performances,
that the ancient myths are
acted out and truly come rule,
gaining the power to shape people's lives.
(speaking foreign language)
The cycles of time draw
three worlds together,
and art brings them to life.
In a temple festival it's possible
to pass through into the other worlds.
(lively music playing)
Gambu was a classical drama
at least 900 years old.
Here a demon prince
searches for his enemies.
Every muscle is perfectly controlled,
even the dancer's eyes.
These festivals are the
heart of village life.
For at least the last 800 years,
the people in the village have
been gathering in this temple
and here they meet their
ancestors, their gods,
their demons, all the forces
that created the total village.
(shouting)
Here, clowns interpret the
classical Gambu performance.
They are a purely Balinese invention,
as trilinguists translating
the ancient stories,
and making them come alive for the people.
(speaking foreign language)
A village girl, Umahi,
becomes a Gambu princess,
forced to marry against her will.
In the poem Suma Sutaka,
it is said when a woman wishes to die,
she asks the gods to return her beauty
to that of the martika.
The loveliness of her hair,
to the rain bearing clouds.
And her tears to the dew drops
suspended from the tip
of a blade of grass.
(singing in foreign language)
The older women dance close to
the shrine of the ancestors.
Death for the Balinese is only a moment
in an endless cycle of rebirths,
that will bring them back to the village.
(chanting)
At the climax of the festival,
everyone and everything is
blessed with holy water.
The Balinese call their
religion Agama Tirtha,
holy water religion.
For them, water is the source of life,
and water comes from the underworld.
In a crater lake at the
center of the island,
the temple Ulun Danu marks the spot
where the waters of the underworld
emerge into the middle world.
Far below this crater lake,
two great snakes lie
cold in the dark ocean.
It is the thrashing of their bodies
that forces the waters
of life up into the lake.
This master temple
where the waters emerge,
stands as a hub of a network of temples
that organized the flow of water
to the rice terraces of Bali.
All along the irrigation canals,
there a temples like Ulun Danu.
Each one's responsible
for the fields around it.
In tropical Bali, there are no seasons.
Temples mark the flow of time.
Every temple has its
own cycle of festivals,
and it is these festivals
that tell the farmer
when to plant and harvest,
and when the fields must be flooded.
Using this ancient and intricate system,
there are fields in Bali
that have been producing
two crops of rice a year for centuries.
The temples make this system work,
because they do something unique.
With their carefully worked
out schedule of festivals,
they stagger the use of
Bali's limited water supply.
This process begins when
a master water temple
holds a major water festival.
On the same day, the farmers from
designated local water temples,
begin to irrigate and plant their fields.
Some time later, other assigned temples
begin their planting cycles,
while the previously flooded fields
are drained for harvesting.
On and on the opening and
closing of irrigation canals
is repeated until every rice field
in the master temple's
area has been flooded.
While some fields are wet, others are dry,
and the available water is used
evenly throughout the year.
During part of its growing cycle,
the rice field must become a still pond,
so that the blue green algae can form.
The algae has invisible powers,
drawing nitrogen directly from the air,
and fertilizing the rice without depleting
the nutrients in the soil.
Later, ducks eat the fish and insects
that attack the young rice,
and fertilize the mud
with their droppings.
Ducks and algae are just two factors
that have been used by Balinese farmers
to keep their ecological
balance for centuries.
(ducks chirping)
A few years ago, foreign
experts persuaded many farms
to give up the temple system
of organizing agriculture.
They argued that the ritual
calendar was irrational,
so everyone planted rice as
fast and as often as possible
and ignored the temple calendar.
Three days before the harvesting begins,
a special rite is held in the fields
to warn the rice that its
time of sacrifice is near.
And when its time is come,
the rice is harvested
with a blade designed to be
concealed in the palm of hand
so the transition from life
to death is not shocking.
(workers chatting)
The rice goddess, Daya Sri,
controls cycles of growth,
while demons bring death and decay.
The struggles between gods and demons
are usually invisible,
but can be made to appear
through wayand, the
art of shadow puppetry.
(poignant music playing)
(speaking foreign language)
In Balinese, wayang is reflection,
with 200 puppets and the
five languages drawn,
wayang can begin to
reflect the full complexity
of the Balinese world.
Wayang is the most ancient Balinese art,
and still the most popular.
It is their theater, television,
news stand, and school room.
The Balinese believe
that the middle world,
we can not perceive reality directly.
Our world is the world of illusion.
But on a wayang screen, the
shadows of the true realities
that lie beyond our senses can appear.
Wayang is a window into the other worlds.
(bell music playing)
Ewayan Wucha, a puppeteer,
ritually cleanses himself
to become clear channel
between the gods and his community.
He asks the gods to
descend to his performance
as though it were a temple.
The divine power is in everything,
even the letters of the poem
or the words of the puppeteer.
In his hand is the kiyang, tree of life,
which draws the energies of
the three worlds together,
so the puppeteer can use them
for the good of the community.
(speaking foreign language)
Patun is Wucha's sister,
they belong to a family of puppeteers.
A few works before this lesson,
Patun's husband Madri was
killed in a motorcycle accident
on his way home from a performance.
Madri was the greatest
puppeteer in all Bali.
Now Patun has begun to study wayang,
something only two other women have done.
(speaking foreign language)
Eka Desa Rudra is the
supreme temple ceremony
about to begin in Bali's
great master temple, Besakih.
Here for an instant,
all the invisible worlds
will be joined while the
forces of growth and decay
struggle for possession
of the middle world.
Eka Desa Rudra can happen
only once in 100 years.
No one alive has ever seen this ceremony.
It is created from a few fragments
of ancient poetry on lontars,
which state that even civilizations
have cycles of growth and decay,
which must be kept under control.
Eka Desa Rudra is a
ceremony of intense pride,
but even more of defiance.
It's a way for the
Balinese say to the world,
we will not let the forces
of change overwhelm us.
We will not let our civilization die.
(dramatic drum music playing)
This series of ceremonies
is considered extremely dangerous.
It will culminate on the tenth day,
at the moment the sentry returns,
when the high priests will
try to transport Rudra,
the most powerful demon of destruction,
into Siva, the supreme god.
If the ceremony is not a success,
it is believe the forces of decay
will go out of control, and
the middle world, our world,
will come to an end.
(bell ringing)
(speaking foreign language)
(peaceful music playing)
In 500 villages, preparations begin
for the Eka Desa Rudra ceremonies.
In the village of Sukawati,
after days of collecting
all the ingredients,
people are finally starting
to create the offerings
which will entice the
demons to the ceremony.
(speaking foreign language)
The offerings for the
demons are extraordinary.
They manage to make something beautiful
out of things like pig fat.
Now everything is ready for the journey,
except for the truck to get the pasaki,
which seems to be lost.
Most outsiders never see the
most beautiful Balinese arts.
They glitter in sunshine for a few hours,
and then they're dismantled and burned.
What is important for the Balinese,
is not now how long something lasts,
but how close to perfection it comes,
and perfection never lasts.
Now remains only to convince
one of the less willing offerings
to join the festive spirits.
Besakih temple on the slopes
of the volcano Gunung Agung,
five days until Eka Dasa Rudra,
and the beginning of a new century.
(speaking foreign language)
In Bali, demons are more
than a simple superstition.
The word for demon in Balinese
comes from the Sanskrit word for element.
Eka Dasa Rudra symbolically
dissolves nature
back into its raw elements,
so gods can recombine into higher forms.
Just as beautiful offerings are made
from crude ingredients.
The demon offerings from Sukawati
have a very special destination
in a mountain shrine
high above the main temple.
This is where the demonic
Rudra first ascend,
so that the Sukawati offerings will be
the first ones that the demon tastes.
But not all of the
preparations for Eka Dasa Rudra
happen in the mountain temples.
(festive music playing)
This morning begins the Melasti,
the joining of three worlds.
From every village temple in Bali,
processions train for miles down to sea,
carrying gods in mock chariots.
(purposeful music playing)
By noon they've reached a sea
to await the arrival of the demons.
Thousands of offerings are laid out,
and high priests summon the
demons from beneath the seas.
(bell ringing)
The demons scream up from the black depths
towards the beach to
feast on the offerings
and to savor the delicious impurities.
At the critical moment
when the ceremony ends,
a great wave comes and
washes everything clean.
(cheering)
It's taken as a sign the
demons are not displeased.
A good sign for Eka Dasa Rudra.
The Sati temple, it is now
one day until Eka Dasa Rudra.
The offerings stream
in from all over Bali,
to satisfy the gods most
are renewed twice a day.
Today is Mipatur, the
day for animal sacrifice.
One representative of virtually
every Balinese animal will be offered.
Some, such as the jungle quail,
are rarely seen by the Balinese.
(speaking foreign language)
There's even an eagle,
which came on its own to the ceremony.
(speaking foreign language)
With colored ribbons, high
priests send the animals
to the shrines of demons
at the five cardinal
points of the compass.
(speaking foreign language)
Here, priests of the
South allows the incense
to help him into his trance,
in which he will he will first
lightly brush the animals
with his sword, setting their souls free
before their blood is actually
spilled by other priests.
(dramatic music playing)
Symbolically, their deaths
dissolve the elements of nature,
so Siva can recombine them
to a more perfect order.
The Balinese believe in reincarnation,
and that death, whether
their own or another's,
should hold no fear.
Barus, the wobbling dance
of the ancient warriors,
greets Indonesia's President Suharto
and a host of dignitaries.
(dramatic bell music playing)
The Presidential party was asked
not to arrive by helicopter,
for fear its passage would
annoy the descending Rudras.
Suharto's arrival awakens dark memories
of another Indonesian president,
and the disastrous attempt
to interfere with the timing
of the Eka Dasa Rudra.
In 1963, Indonesia was in turmoil.
With the economy in ruins,
President Sukarno faced
a major political threat.
The Communists, the military,
and the other political parties
were scrambling for power.
In an attempt to restore
the people's confidence
in his regime, Sukarno
compelled Balinese priests
to begin preparation for Eka Dasa Rudra,
even though it was not the proper time.
So over the objections
of Balinese priests,
preparations began.
Besakih temple is located halfway up
a great active volcano, Gunung Agung.
When the priests went to
the mouth of the volcano
for holy water, they
found only smoke and ash.
And Agung began to rumble.
Edah Padang Agrisita was then
the highest religious authority in Bali.
It was his responsibility
to try to carry out
the Eka Dasa Rudra at the wrong time.
(rumbling)
By March 17, 1963, great rivers of lava
were pouring down slopes of Agung
in its first eruption in recorded history.
Smoke and volcanic ash blotted out the sun
over most of Bali,
when the lava reached the plains,
entire villages were wiped out.
100,000 refugees were
driven from their homes,
and many died of asphyxiation, burns,
and later, starvation.
(chanting)
Today at high noon, the
11 Rudras will descend
into the ceremonial enclosure
in front of the temple.
It is to these platforms
at the noon time turning
of the 100th cycle of the nine dark moon,
that the Rudras will descend,
and hopefully be transformed.
At each of the 11 shrines,
the high priests prepare
for the demons' assembly.
Gustin Agurabar is a
Balinese anthropologist,
explaining to his students
the meaning of an event
that will happen only
once in their lifetimes.
(speaking foreign language)
A messenger from Siva appears
in a wayang performance
at Eka Dasa Rudra.
The moment approaches when the priests
must face the Rudras, the
most powerful demons of all.
Each priest must concentrate
all of his powers into timed gestures.
(bell ringing)
Tempted by the offerings, one
by one the demons descend.
(lively music playing)
(bell ringing)
And now is the time of greatest danger.
The two supreme demons, Kala
and Rudra, must be faced.
30 priests and half a million Balinese,
focus their minds and wills on
bringing them under control.
In a few moments, a
new century will begin.
Noon, Eka Dasa Rudra is complete.
Today the poetry on the
lontars still have power
to draw an entire society together.
It will be years before
any priest will dare say
whether the ceremony was a success.
Yet each person has confronted
the forces of decay and destruction
to restore balance of the middle world.
The Balinese asked us to explain,
that they do not do this
ceremony only for themselves,
or for the Hindu people of the world,
but for us all.
(somber singing in foreign language)
Major funding for Odyssey
was provided by the National
Endowment for the Humanities.
Additional funding was provided by
the Corporation for Public Broadcasting,
and the Polaroid Corporation.
(electronic jingle)